+++
title = "Weekly Update"
date = "2022-12-09"
description = "Ares, Solid-State Subscriptions, Kelvin Shims, Ames Improvements, and More."
[extra]
author = "Ted Blackman"
ship = "~rovnys-ricfer"
+++


## Ares

This week I had the rare treat of getting to [write some Hoon](https://github.com/urbit/new-mars/commit/638b761e93c41580f535009a766c0c3e2332344d).  It was a double treat, because I was pair-programming with `~ritpub-sipsyl` on [Ares](https://roadmap.urbit.org/project/new-mars), the experimental rewrite of the Nock interpreter.  Sometime soon I'd like to write up a guide to learning about Ares, but I needed to learn more about it myself first.  I'll take a stab at a brief explanation here.

The code is very much under active development, so it could change shape, but for now, Ares has the following components:
- the "2stackz" noun allocator (with separate heap)
- snapshot system
- compiler from Nock to machine code
  - subject knowledge analysis
  - linearization
  - compile-time jet matching
  - machine code generation

The allocator uses two stacks that grow toward each other, to achieve a hybrid between refcounting and garbage collection.  It does a small copying collection from one stack to the other at each return from a stack frame.  This has GC's asymptotic advantage over refcounting (it only needs to modify data that's returned, instead of all data that gets freed, which for Urbit includes a lot of garbage cons-cells), but retains the determinism of refcounting, which is important for ensuring predictable performance.  There will also be a supplementary heap, to prevent large values from being copied excessively.

[Omitted long matching line]

Subject knowledge analysis is a novel static analysis technique devised by `~ritpub-sipsyl` that infers the tree shape of the Nock "subject" (the environment -- everything that's in scope, including code and data) at each stage of a complex Nock operation.  This information can be used to elide memory allocations for intermediate products by putting them in registers instead, especially when combined with linearization.

The linearizer was the code `~ritpub-sipsyl` guided me in working on this past week.  This converts "Nock--" (the `$nomm` datatype), representing Nock code whose subject knowledge has already been analyzed, to a lower-level linear intermediate language that's a bit higher level than LLVM assembly.  This linear language, like LLVM assembly, has SSA (static single assignment) registers, labels, and jumps, like an assembly code.  It's specific to Nock, though, and it doesn't include any information about allocation.

After linearization, this intermediate form will need to have its jets matched (once, at compile time, which should yield much faster code than the current interpreter, which checks jet matching on every Nock function call) and then be compiled to machine code.  This system has not been implemented yet.

## Solid-State Subscriptions

`~wicrum-wicrun` and I just put the SSS prototype into the hands of developers to make some real apps.  In the process, we ironed out some API details, especially around error handling.  Unlike the current subscription system, with SSS if your app crashes on a subscription update, that doesn't kill the subscription.  Instead, the kernel will still let you see the latest state of that subscription (which it generated itself, outside your agent), but it will be marked with a bit that said you crashed on it so you don't mistake it for having been processed (and notify you of the crash).  When the next "rock" (publication state) arrives from the publisher, Gall will inject that into your agent, and if that gets processed correctly, your agent is back in sync.

Note that this works because the SSS formulation of a subscription does not guarantee that your agent receives every diff; some could be skipped.  The only thing your agent knows is that you will eventually be told the current state of this subscription.  I call this a "non-hysteretic" subscription model, in contrast to a "hysteretic" subscription, which would guarantee you receive the whole sequence of diffs in order.

Non-hysteretic subscriptions form a better base layer, in my opinion, because they're less brittle.  A subscriber can jump into the middle of a stream without needing to receive the full history, resynchronization is easier, and error handling is more flexible.  For subscriptions that need hystericity, you can copy each update into the state, so the state would contain the event log.  Now you have a hysteretic subscription implemented straightforwardly using a non-hysteretic state replication system -- whereas I'm not sure it's even possible to build a non-hysteretic system on top of a hysteretic one.

## Kelvin Shims

`~tinnus-napbus` and `~dinleb-rambep` are pushing to have a demo of building and running an agent at an old Kelvin early next week.  Both Gall and Clay sides of this scaffolding are coming together nicely.  Latest work can be found in this [pull request](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/pull/6104).

Once the demo works, the next steps will be adding support in `%spider` to run old threads, and reducing code duplication in Gall between the runner for new agents and the runner for old agents.

## Ames Improvements

`~norsyr-torryn` has been making steady improvements to Ames.  After his recent bugfixes, he also [added a recovery command](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/pull/6129) called `|close-flows` to clean up the state on ships that had problems with an earlier update, and he's been refactoring Ames to use the `+abet` pattern and make it easier to work on while ensuring it maintains its invariants.  He's already trimmed off about 100 lines of code.  I expect Ames can be made quite a bit cleaner, smaller, and more obviously correct -- a lot of the ames code is still the same as the first version I got to work three years ago, and I wince a bit when I look at it.

## Upgrade Overhaul

This made it out the door!  Congratulations, `~wicdev-wisryt` and the other people who worked on that.

## Userspace Permissions

`~palfun-foslup` got a prototype of his userspace permissioning system to block updates on permission changes, which was one of the last major questions to resolve in the architecture before initial deployment.  I'm looking forward to that project moving forward and getting deployed -- I'd estimate release in mid-Q1 2023.