+++
title = "Weekly Update"
date = "2023-02-11"
description = "First Two UF-Led Releases"
[extra]
author = "Ted Blackman"
ship = "~rovnys-ricfer"
+++

Big couple weeks, apologies for being late with this update!

Core dev hit the ground running in January by performing weekly releases of the Urbit OS.  Starting two weeks ago, the Urbit Foundation took over this weekly release process.  Many thanks to `~dovsem-bornyl` and `~wicdev-wisryt` for training us in the procedures they developed at Tlon.  `~wolref-podlex` and I will continue the work they've been doing to tweak the process to make it more organized, more streamlined, more inclusive of the community, and less error-prone.

[`~wicdev-wisryt`'s thread about releases](https://twitter.com/pcmonk/status/1624165311745503233) does a good job summarizing the progress we've made.  I would add to it that we wouldn't be able to do this now without `~wicdev-wisryt`'s [Upgrade Overhaul](https://roadmap.urbit.org/project/agents-in-clay) project, released at the end of 2022, which fixed deep issues in Arvo's upgrade system that made upgrades unreliable.

- [Arvo release two weeks ago](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/releases/tag/urbit-os-v2.131)
- [Vere release two weeks ago](https://github.com/urbit/vere/releases/tag/vere-v1.18)
- [Arvo release last week](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/releases/tag/urbit-os-v2.132)
- [Vere release last week](https://github.com/urbit/vere/releases/tag/vere-v1.19)

`~wolref-podlex` and I have been making other changes to the development process too.  One major change is that core devs are now spending most of our time in a `gather.town` instance, originally created by `~tiller-tolbus` for the Urbit community to collaborate by making it easy to jump in and out of impromptu video calls.  A couple weeks ago, I spent some time there to pair-program with `~mastyr-bottec` on event log truncation and was impressed with how many devs from the community showed up to help.

`~tiller-tolbus` was gracious enough to make UF admins of the `gather.town` instance so we can sponsor it and manage it.  Last week we ran a release in there for the first time.  Five or ten devs from outside UF or Tlon popped their heads in, observed, kibbitzed, and helped keep people on track.  Good vibes.  One of UF's mantras for this year is "the community is our team."  This is now coming true.

Another change `~wolref-podlex` and I have made to the core dev process is to have daily "PR Blitz" meetings to make sure issues and PRs are making progress.  These meetings take place in gathertown too, so the community can listen in and help out.  Last week we merged 19 PRs, which I believe is a new record.

I'm excited about `~mastyr-bottec`'s [event log truncation](/project/event-log-truncation) work, which has now been merged into the `develop` branch and is slated for Tuesday release.  `~littel-wolfur` has a 500GB event log, which can now be deleted.  This is one of a few features that have been planned since the beginning of the Urbit project but hadn't been built.  For now it's still manual.  Future work, as part of the [Mars/Urth Split](/project/mars-urth), will implement it in a more robust manner using the [Epoch System](/project/epoch-system).  But it works, so users and hosting providers aren't left without recourse as their Urbits eat up their hard drives.

I'm also excited about [tuning Ames `%clog` constants](/project/tune-clog), which is now being tested on infrastructure ships and will likely be released a week from Tuesday.  We'll see how much of a difference it will make, but it has the potential to break resubscribe loops for ships publishing popular apps or chat channels.

These resubscribe loops come from the kernel being overly skittish about memory use on publisher ships and too quick to kick a subscriber in case of a momentary slowdown.  Each subscriber then sends a new request to resubscribe.  These extra resubscribe requests cause extra load on the publisher, making further momentary slowdowns more likely, causing further resubscribes, until the system works itself into a frenzy of everybody resubscribing all the time unnecessarily.  We don't know exactly what percentage of publisher load comes from this, but it's certainly not helping.  

[This pull request](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/pull/5827) adds a better measurement for memory use.  This should advance the Pareto frontier of the tradeoff between memory use and resubscription load.

Note that Ames's `%clog` system, whose constants are being tuned here, should itself be obviated by an upcoming subscription system based on [Remote Scry](/project/remote-scry) for networking and [Solid-State Subscriptions](/project/solid-state-publications) for an application model.  On that front, [`~wicrum-wicrun`'s solid-state subscription library](https://github.com/urbit/urbit/pull/6269) is now in good shape and ready to be pounded on by userspace devs; documentation coming soon.
